# Median salaries
Dataset and methodology for college graduates vs. high school graduates median salaries story
# Overview
For this story, I sought to identify whether college graduates -- specifically bachelor's degree holders -- earn more than high school graduates and by how much. I found the median earnings 6 and 10 years after entry for bachelor's degree holders ranges between $9K and $140K. Top earners attended STEM-focused, non-profti and selective institutions mostly. College increases earning potential, but which college and which major determines where a person lands on that spectrum.  
# Data sources
Most-Recent-Cohors-Institutions_CLEANED.xlsx was collected by the U.S. Department of Education. This dataset contains aggregate data for each institution and ranges from the academic years of 1996-1997 through 2022-2023.  
p20_CLEANED.xlsx was collected by the United States Census Bureau. This dataset contains educational attainment for workers 25 years old and over by median earnings and sex.  
# Methodology
Most-Recent-Cohors-Institutions.xlsx needed little cleaning. Minor modifications included deleting unecessary columns and standardazing formatting. p20.xlsx required more extensive cleaning. Multiple header rows were removed and replaced by a more consistent table structure. Two new columns were added: Education_Level and Footnotes. Footnote values were originally embedded next to specific years in the Year column, but were moved to a different column for uniformity purposes. These values correspond to methodological notes or revisions in the years they were originally embedded to. 
The analysis focused on contrasting median earnings by institution and educational attainment from 1996 through 2024. Most-Recent-Cohorts-Institutions.xlsx required minimal cleaning. Minor modifications included removing unnecessary columns and standardizing formatting for consistency.
In contrast, p20.xlsx required more extensive cleaning. The dataset contained multiple header rows. These were removed to create a single and consistent table structure. I then reorganized the data by adding an Education_Level column.
Additionally, footnote indicators originally embedded in the year column were placed in a separate Footnote column. This preserved important methodological notes and revisions while ensuring the Year column remained consistent and usable for analysis.
# Limitations
This data cannot explain causation. p20_CLEANED.xlsx reports the varying median salaries in relation to educational attaninment, but other factors that could affect income include occupation, industry, geographic location, work experience, etc. Thus, differences in earnings cannot be attributed soley by a person's education level. Additionally, this dataset fails to identify fields of study. That means, bachelor's degree holders are grouped regardless of their major although salaries differ largely depending on the discipline practiced.
Most-Recent-Cohors-Institutions_CLEANED.xlsx provides institutional-level data and, because of that, the data more so reflects aggregate outcomes than individual experiences. Furthermore, this data set fails to account for a couple of the same factors p20_CLEANED.xlsx omits as well: occupation, industry, geographic location, field of study, etc. Omitting fields of study, because job opportunities depend heavily on what a person majored in, is a major limitation. 
